---
layout: post
title: Why did I do a PhD? 
date: 2022-08-30 00:00:00
description: A reflection from my time in undergrad
tags: phd 
categories:
---

*Disclaimer: This article tries to explain why I chose to do a PhD over the other career paths I was considering.
By design, its specific to me: my career ambitions, my interest area, my underlying motivations, my financial situation, etc.
I decided to write this up because I've gotten a lot of questions on it, so I think it might be helpful for others also.
Please understand that given your personal situation, you might come to a different conclusion.*

During undergrad, I started research early in the summer after first-year (I liked doing it, and I knew PhD required research experience),
but I didn't fully choose the PhD route until just before the applications came around. 
Before that time, I was considered (some more than others) a few different career paths:
law school for tech policy, deep tech startups, industrial research, and PhD.
This blog post attempts to explain why I chose the PhD route.

## Why not to do it

When trying to explain `x`, it helps to explain `!x` first.
There's a lot of reasons not to pursue a PhD:
1. If you care about making a lot of money quickly, PhD is definitely not the best approach.
To do that, work at a quantitative finance company (e.g., Jane Street or Citadel).
With PhD, you'll be making around $35k/year for 5-6 years, supplemented by possible summer internship money.
2. You're dedicating 5-6 years of your life towards this.
In that time, you could be gaining industry experience and connections.
3. It's arguably more risky than staying in industry.
You may not have a good advisor relationship, you may not come up with good ideas, etc.
In industry, a good engineer probably knows that they're going to get promoted on a fairly regular schedule.
4. You don't need it to be a normal software engineer.
If you take challenging classes in undergrad, you can learn foundational knowledge there.
Then, you can also learn more real-world programming by working on personal projects and doing internships.
After that, you should be ready to rise up the software engineering ranks.

## Why to do it

Now that all the negatives are out of the way, let me get to the positives.
Obviously, if you want to become a professor, there's no questions asked: you have to do a PhD.
For all the people like me who aren't that certain about your career paths, here's some of the reasons that pursuaded me:
1. PhD gives you 6 years to pursue a sub-field in quite a lot of depth.
This is an amazing experience if you really like your sub-field.
Apart from being intellectually interesting, it also could potentially give you the following benefits, depending on how things go.
2. You could become well-known in your sub-field and build connections.
This could help make you more trustworthy if you're trying to start your own deep tech startup,
and it could help you recruit people as well.
3. You have the opportunity to significantly improve your communication skills.
This is because PhD forces you to write lots of papers, blog posts, and presentations.
You have to be able to distill your research down and communicate it to different audiences.
4. You become better more generally at dealing with open problems and ambiguity.
This skill is transferrable to different areas, and is one of the reasons why you often
see PhDs in research positions at a company.
5. You become better at having broader, long-term visions for a given problem.
This is because you are required to stitch together multiple related projects to form your thesis.
I think this could be useful for becoming a leader at a specific company.

Finally, my thoughts are this: if you have the opportunity to 
